Versioning and extensions (#42)
frictionlessdata/datapackage: content/docs/specifications/extensions.md

---
title: Extensions
sidebar:
  order: 5
---

<table>
  <tr>
    <th>Authors</th>
    <td>Rufus Pollock, Paul Walsh, Adam Kariv, Evgeny Karev, Peter Desmet</td>
  </tr>
</table>

Data Package Standard extensibility features for domain-specific needs.

## Language

The key words `MUST`, `MUST NOT`, `REQUIRED`, `SHALL`, `SHALL NOT`, `SHOULD`, `SHOULD NOT`, `RECOMMENDED`, `MAY`, and `OPTIONAL` in this document are to be interpreted as described in [RFC 2119](https://www.ietf.org/rfc/rfc2119.txt)

## Introduction

> Data Package Standard provides a rich set of metadata and data features for general applications. At the same time, Data Package Standard at its core is domain-agnostic and does not provide any builtin means to describe metadata in specific knowledge areas such as biology or medicine.

Author: It's a good question =) I feel here out of my competency as it's quite english-related linguistic one @khusmann @pschumm WDYT? I think usually we say e.g. "JSON Schema" without THE right? So my feeling was that it should be:
- Data Package Standard (capitalized) OR
- the Data Package standard (if standard is not capitalized)

> Data Package Standard provides a rich set of metadata and data features for general applications. At the same time, Data Package Standard at its core is domain-agnostic and does not provide any builtin means to describe metadata in specific knowledge areas such as biology or medicine.

Reviewer: Well, I'm not a grammarian, but I believe in this case Data Package Standard would be a proper noun, so it should be capitalized. And I believe that since we intend this Data Package Standard to be specific (i.e., there's only one), then we should be using a definite article (i.e., the) when referring to it. So it would be "the Data Package Standard" or, if occurring at the beginning of a sentence as in the Introduction above, "The Data Package Standard...".

> Data Package Standard provides a rich set of metadata and data features for general applications. At the same time, Data Package Standard at its core is domain-agnostic and does not provide any builtin means to describe metadata in specific knowledge areas such as biology or medicine.

Author: Thanks! I fixed it

From user-perspective, a custom profile can be provided as a `$schema` property in a corresponding specification [Descriptor](../glossary/#descriptor). Having a profile instructs implementation to validate a descriptor using JSON Schema rules of the profile.

Usually, Data Package is the specification that is extended. As a container format, it is the most natural target for metadata enrichment. At the same time, technically any of the core specifications can be extended. For example, if you build a Table Schema catalog, it is possible to extend a Table Schema specification using the same approach as described below.

Note, that the Data Package Standard's extension system completely relies on the JSON Schema Standard without extending its builtin features in any way. It makes the system robust and provides rich tooling support such as [text editor validation](https://code.visualstudio.com/docs/languages/json#_mapping-in-the-json).

Combining modern JSON Schema features with an ability to provide profiles to any of the core Data Package Standard specification descriptors, allows to achieve almost any of metadata enrichment goals including but not limited to:

> - introducing custom properties on any metadata level

Reviewer 2: These are rather technical. I would list:

- Adding new properties
- Requiring existing properties to comply with certain requirements
- Defining what resources are expected
- Requiring resources to meet certain Table Schema requirements

- requiring a resource list to comply with an extension rules
- ensuring tabular data rules restricting it to a specific Table Schema
- combining existent profiles as a part of a high-level extension
- creating domain-specific dialect and schema catalogues

## Example

> For example, we will create a Spatial Data Package that requires a `geopoint` marker to be provided for each resource consisting a Data Package and .

Reviewer 2: This paragraph is unfinished.

    { "$ref": "#/definitions/spatialMixin" }
  ],
  "definitions": {
    "spatialMixin": {
      "type": "object",
      "properties": {
        "resources": {
          "type": "array",
          "item": {
            "type": "object",
            "required": ["geopoint"],
            "properties": {
              "geopoint": {
                "type": "object",
                "properties": {
                  "lon": { "type": "number" },
                  "lat": { "type": "number" },
                  "additionalProperties": false
                }
              }
            }
          }
        }
      }
    }
  }
}
```

### Descriptor

Consider that the profile above is published at `https://spatial.datapackage.org/profiles/1.0/datapackage.json`. In this case, a Data Package descriptor compatible to exemplar Spatial Data Package (v1) will look as below:

```json
{
  "$schema": "https://spatial.datapackage.org/profiles/1.0/datapackage.json",
  "title": "Spatial Data Package Descriptor",
  "resources": [
    {
      "name": "expedition-1",
      "path": "expedition-1.csv",
      "geopoint": {
        "lon": 90,
        "lat": 90
      }
    }
  ]
}
```

### Software

> On the software level, all the Data Package implementations, even though they are not aware of this extension, will now be validating any Spatial Data Package descriptors from above according to the introduced domain-specific rules. At the same time, we encourage extensions authors to build on top of Data Package implementations to support domain-specific properties on the programming models level as well.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Even though they are not aware of the extension, any Data Package software implementation will be validating a Spatial Data Package out of the box: both the domain-specific properties as well as the general Data Package properties. We do encourage extensions authors however to build on top of existing software to support domain-specific properties on the programming models level as well.
```
